# Calculate model performance metrics

Calculates model performace metrics from the netcdf file generated by
running \`run_ensemble\`

## Usage

``` r
calc_fit(
  ncdf,
  list = NULL,
  model,
  var = "temp",
  dim = "model",
  dim_index = 1,
  qualfun = qual_fun,
  avfun = "mean"
)
```

## Arguments

- ncdf:

  Path to the netcdf file generated by running \`run_ensemble\`

- list:

  Alternatively to \`ncdf\` a list of siimulated variables, as returned
  by \`run_ensemble()\` when argument \`return_list = TRUE\`

- model:

  Vector of models for which to calculate the performance measures

- var:

  Variable for which to calculate the performance measures. Defaults to
  "temp".

- dim:

  character; NetCDF dimensions to extract. Must be either "member" or
  "model". Defaults to "model". Only used if using the netCDF file.
  Currently only works with "model".

- dim_index:

  numeric; Index of dimension chosen to extract from. Defaults to 1.
  Only used if using the netCDF file.

- qualfun:

  Function to calculate the performance measures. Per default calculates
  root mean suqared error (rmse), Nash-Shutcliff efficiency (nse),
  Pearson correlation (r), bias (bias), mean absolute error (mae),
  normalized mean absolute error (nmae), and bias. Can be any function
  that takes observed data as first, and simulated data at the same time
  and depth as the second argument.

- avfun:

  Name of the function to calculate the ensemble average, defaults to
  "mean"

## Author

Johannes Feldbauer

## Examples

``` r
if (FALSE) { # \dontrun{
# using standard quality measures
calc_fit(ncdf = "output/ensemble_output.nc",
                   model = c("FLake", "GLM",  "GOTM", "Simstrat", "MyLake"),
                   var = "temp")
# using own performance measure
 calc_fit(ncdf = "output/ensemble_output.nc",
                  model = c("FLake", "GLM",  "GOTM", "Simstrat", "MyLake"),
                  var = "temp", qualfun = function(O, S) mean(O - S, na.rm = TRUE))
} # }
```
